# **POWERUp2019 Node.js Workshop**

Presented by:
* Dave Romo (dave@eradani.com)
* Aaron Magid (aaron@eradani.com)
* Mark Irish (mirish@ibm.com)

## **Introduction**

Node.js is perhaps one of the most popular technologies in the world today, used by many Fortune 500 companies to automate internal processes, augment existing workflows, and create external services to connect to their legacy systems. Node.js is supported and maintained by many large organizations such as IBM, Google, Microsoft, and Joyent, who work to ensure that it is a viable technology for enterprise-level development. (To learn more, see the [Node.js Foundation](https://foundation.nodejs.org/)).

Fortunately, Node.js is fully supported on the IBM i, allowing you to utilize its power to extend the capabilities of your current applications in ways you never thought possible. Although it may seem scary and foreign at first, with a little practice you will soon see that Node.js is really quite simple to use, and allows you to develop modern programs on your IBM i faster than you ever thought possible.

This workshop will walk you through the process of getting Node.js installed on your machine, teach you JavaScript from square one, show how to use JavaScript with Node.js, and finally teach you how to use an Express.js server to connect your IBM i to the wider world. There are also bonus lessons on TypeScript, a superset of JavaScript that makes developing large applications less error-prone and more maintainable, and a lesson on LoopBack, a framework maintained by IBM that allows you to quickly create REST API endpoints for your data while also doing object relational mapping between your database and JavaScript objects. The entirety of this workshope will be available on the [IBM i open-source software examples GitHub](https://github.com/ibm/ibmi-oss-examples).

Throughout the workshop, we will strive to explain things in sufficient detail so there are few if any 'black boxes' that you are expected to use but not understand. At times it may seem like we are going slow, but really understanding the basics of both JavaScript and Node.js will lay a strong foundation for development after the conclusion of the workshop.

If you have any questions after the conclusion of the workshop, feel free to reach out to use at the conference 

### [Next: Setup](./2.setup.md)