# POWERUp2019 Node.js Workshop

## **Setup**

### Please Note:

The day of the workshop, we will primarily be using a website called repl.it to easily run our JavaScript code and get familiar with Node.js. The JavaScript and Node.js skills you gain by using this website and the code you will write will be the exact same as the code that your run on our IBM i, with the exception of the IBM i-specific database and toolkit connectors.

The choice was made to avoid using the IBM i because connecting to the IBM i partition with a terminal, mounting the file system to be able to develop on your laptop, and troubleshooting issues with file and database permissions would take the majority of the time of the workshop. Nonetheless, instructions are given below to get Node.js working on your system

---

## **repl.it**

## Example Repl.it Setup

To help us get to coding faster, we'll be using an online IDE for this workshop called **[Repl.it](https://Repl.it)**. Let's get started!

**Note: Projects on Repl.it are deleted after an hour unless you create a free account with them.** Please create an account if you want to take your code home with you!

### Getting Started with Repl.it

To start, head over to <a href="https://repl.it" target="_blank">**the Repl.it website**</a> and create a free account. Once you're logged in, hit the "new repl" button at the top of the dashboard. This should prompt you to search for and select a language. Repl.it supports many, many languages, but the two we'll be using in this workshop are **Nodejs** and **TypeScript**.

Let's go ahead and create a **Nodejs** project - you will be able to use this for the next workshop section.

Hit the "new repl" button, select **Nodejs**, name your project, and press "Create Repl" - Repl should take you to its online editor.

### The Repl.it Editor

The Repl.it editor is divided into three columns:

* **Files** on the left side lists the files and folders in your project.
* **Editor** in the center is where you edit a particular file.
* **Console** on the right shows output from your project.

There is also a thin sidebar at the far left edge with a few options, which manipulate the **Files** section:

* The **page** icon switches the Files section to list project files.
* The **cube** icon switches the Files section to list Packages (open-source dependencies) of your project. The Packages interface is used to add packages to your project, which we'll do frequently once we get to Node and Express.
* The **people** icon starts up Multiplayer mode, which you can use to collaborate on a single Repl.it project with multiple people.
* The **gear** icon will show basic editor settings such as font size and indent size.

**Finally, and perhaps most importantly,** the **Console** section of the editor shows the base URL of your project at the top. Once you create a Node server in your Repl, it will be publicly accessible at that URL.

_We're relying on you to figure out what the bright green "run" button at the top of the editor does._

[//]: # (TODO: Add a section on Postman so they'll be able to send requests to their servers)

---
---

## **Setting up Node.js (and your Environment) on your IBM i**

If you are looking to use Node.js after the workshop, it would probably be a good time to set up the open-source environment on your IBM i. Below are the steps to walk you through that process, as well as how to set up a modern and efficient development environment.

---

### **The IBM i Open-Source Environment**

Before you can use Node.js on your IBM i, you will need to install the open-source environment. The primary component of the open-source environment is `yum`, or "Yellowdog Updater, Modified", which is a utility that can be used to install and update software on your IBM i while also keeping track of and maintaining the dependencies for that software. Unlike most software on the IBM i, which is delivered through PTFs, `yum` is used to deliver all of the open-source software on IBM i, so it is an important utility to become familiar with.

There are three ways that you can install the open-source environment:

**NOTE:** All of the methods for installing the open-source environment require `*ALLOBJ` authority for the user attempting the installation.

**NOTE:** Methods 1 and 2 currently requires that your PC has direct FTP access to the public IBM file server. Many companies now block FTP access on the IBM i. If that is the case, refer to Method 3. "Offline Install Instructions (without ACS)".

1. **Access Client Solutions (ACS)**
    * If you do not have ACS installed on your PC/Mac/Linux, it can be downloaded at https://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=isg3T1026805
    * If you have not set up your IBM i configuration in ACS, you will need to do so now by selecting `System Configuration` under `Management` in the side menu.
    * With your system selected in the left menu, go to `Tools` in the top menu and select `Open Source Package Management`.
    * If you do not have the open-source environment installed, you will be prompted with `Open source environment not installed! Would you like to install now?`. Select `Yes`, and then wait for the installation to finish.

2. **Online Installation with `boostrap.sql`**
    * Download [bootstrap.sql](https://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/ibmi/products/pase/rpms/bootstrap.sql) onto your PC/Mac/Linux, or copy the contents of the file.
    * In ACS, select `Run SQL Scripts` on the left menu.
    * Open `boostrap.sql` or paste the contents into the SQL window
    * Run all scripts with `Ctrl + Shift + A` or through the menu with `Run` -> `All`
    * If the result is "Bootstrapping Successful" you're all good. If not, consult /tmp/bootstrap.log.

3. **Offline Installation with `bootstrap.sql`**
    * If your IBM i cannot use FTP to access the public IBM file server...
    * Download [bootstrap.sql](https://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/ibmi/products/pase/rpms/bootstrap.sql) onto your PC/Mac/Linux, or copy the contents of the file.
    * Download [bootstrap.tar.Z](https://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/ibmi/products/pase/rpms/bootstrap.tar.Z) onto your PC/Mac/Linux.
    * Copy both files to the `/tmp` directory of your IBM i (via FTP, mapped network drive, scp, etc). _**Make sure to transfer them in binary**_.
    * From a 5250 terminal run: `QSH CMD('touch -C 819 /tmp/bootstrap.log; /QOpenSys/usr/bin/ksh /tmp/bootstrap.sh > /tmp/bootstrap.log 2>&1')`
    * If you see message `QSH005: "Command ended normally with exit status 0"` in the job log you're all good. If not, consult /tmp/bootstrap.log.

---

### **Connecting to PASE on your IBM i with SSH**

Before we install Node.js onto your IBM i, we are going to connect to the IBM i through a terminal using OpenSSH. This will allow you to navigate through the PASE environment of your IBM i in a standard Unix-like manner directly from your Windows/Mac/Linux machine.

Before you connect to your IBM i through SSH, you need to make sure that your have the SSH daemon running on your IBM i. To do this, open a 5250 terminal and run `STRTCPSVR *SSHD`. You can now connect to your IBM i through a terminal on your PC/Mac/Linux machine.

* **Windows**
  * If you are running [Windows 10 (and have the latest updates)](https://www.howtogeek.com/336775/how-to-enable-and-use-windows-10s-built-in-ssh-commands/), there is a built-in OpenSSH client which you can access through PowerShell. In PowerShell, run `ssh user*@ibmilocation`, replacing `user` with your IBM i user name, and `ibmilocation` replaced with the name or IP address of your IBM i.
  * If you do not have the built-in OpenSSH client, you can download a utility like [PuTTY](https://www.putty.org/), which allows you to access your IBM i through a terminal

* **Mac and Linux**
  * Both Mac and Linux machines should have a built-in OpenSSH client. To use it, open a terminal and run `ssh user@ibmilocation`, replacing `user` with your IBM i user name, and `ibmilocation` replaced with the name or IP address of your IBM i.

If you have a home directory for your user in PASE (`/home/yourname`), you will be placed there as the default location when you connect with SSH. If you do not have a user directory, you will be placed in the root directory (`/`). From there, we can interact with system through terminal commands

If you are new to PASE, or have never even navigated around a Unix environment with a terminal before, those would be good skills to learn. Unfortunately that is outside the scope of this workshop, but there are many, many resources online that can help get you started.

---

### **Installing Node.js on your IBM i**

With the open-source environment installed you can now download Node.js onto your IBM i. Like installing the open-source environment, you must have `*ALLOBJ` authority in order to install and update open-source packages. 

Open-source software on the IBM i can be installed through either ACS or a terminal in an SSH session.

1. **The easy way: Access Client Solutions**
    * In ACS, use the top menu to select `Tools` -> `Open Source Package Management`.
    * In the window that opens, see if the package you want is already installed under the `Installed packages` tab. For this workshop, we are looking for `nodejs10`.
    * If the package is not installed, go to the `Available packages` tab and find `nodejs10` and install it.

2. **The right way: SSH Terminal**
    * To install open-source packages through the terminal, simply run `yum install <packagename>`, in this case `yum install nodejs10`.
    * You will be shown all the packages that will be installed when you install Node.js. These packages are the dependencies that Node.js requires to run, and will be uninstalled (if not used by other packages) when you uninstall Node.js. The power of yum!
    * You will have to enter `y` in order to agree to download the packages. They should all install and place the files in the correct location (Usually in `/QOpenSys/pkgs/bin`).

You should now be able to see that Node.js is installed by entering `which node` or `which npm` in your terminal. You might get an error similar to the following:

```
no node in /QOpenSys/usr/bin /usr/ccs/bin /QOpenSys/usr/bin/X11 /usr/sbin . /usr/bin
```

If you do, then that simply means that the right directory hasn't been added to your `PATH` environment variable. This variables tells your terminal where to look for programs to execute. IBM i open-source packages are installed in `/QOpenSys/pkgs/bin/`, so lets add that to the PATH variable.

First, we are going to execute `printenv` to see what is currently in our environment variables.

```
printenv
```

This just prints out the current values of environment variables, which will be helpful if we screw up the next step. Next, we will append `/QOpenSys/pkgs/bin` to the beginning of the `PATH` variable.

```
PATH=/QOpenSys/pkgs/bin/:$PATH
```

It is important that we add `$PATH` to the end of our assignment, to copy all of what is currentl in your path. **If you do not add `:$PATH` to the end of your assignment, you will overrite your old PATH variable and it will have to be manually typed out to match what its value showed when we ran `printenv`**

You will now have to load reload your PATH variable

```
export PATH
```

You should know be able to run `which node` or `which npm` and see the location where these programs live, and be confident that Node.js has been installed on your system.

---

### **Mounting your PASE Files onto your PC/Mac/Linux**

* Using mount utility in Linux (and mac?)
* Can be done with ACS too I believe...

