# POWERUp2019 Node.js Workshop

## **JavaScript**
---

### **Introduction**

JavaScript was originally created for manipulating HTML inside the browser, but has spread in recent years to web servers as Node.js and even cross-platform native applications through systems like [Ionic](https://ionicframework.com/) and [Electron](https://electronjs.org/). In this lab, we will use JavaScript exclusively for Node.js development.

JavaScript is:

* weakly typed
* interpreted ([kind of](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/138521/is-javascript-interpreted-by-design))
* functional
* prototype-based

One of the reasons JavaScript is so popular is that it is quick to learn and use. Because it is weakly typed, developers do not have to worry about keeping track of data types, which allows for greatly increased development speed. As we will eventually see in this lab, that can become an issue in larger projects, but for now we will use it to our advantage.

**Fun fact:** JavaScript, despite its name and syntax similarities, has no technical relation to Java. The standards for JavaScript are specified as ECMAScript - the implementation used for browsers and now Node.js was named JavaScript as part of a marketing deal between Netscape and Sun, and the name stuck.

**Please do not refer to JavaScript as 'Java'! You will look ignorant to most JavaScript developers and anyone born after 1985!**

---

### Your First Steps with JavaScript

For this section of the lab, we are going to use repl.it to learn how to program in JavaScript. Although repl.it is running a Node.js environment to execute your code, don't worry about that part just yet. For now, concentrate on learning JavaScript. Although the tutorials below may seem overly elementary, they teach important concepts that are crucial in the remaining parts of the lab (and for your future career as a Node.js developer). The Node.js part will come after this and requires that you learned a thing or two in this section!

If you are walking through the lab afterwards and want to execute the code in these tutorials in your local Node.js process instead of in repl.it, simply create a file for each tutorial (e.g. hello,js) and then run it with

```
node hello.js
```

You should see the output the same as in repl.it!

---

### **1. Hello World**

As with any new programming language, we will start with the classic Hello World program. In the editing section of your file, write the following line of code:

```javascript
console.log('Hello World'); // will print out 'Hello World'
```
Our simple one-line example illustrates some important parts of JavaScript. First, note that I created a comment after the code with `//`. When you start a comment with `//`, everything on the line that comes after it is treated as a comment and is not executed. You can also create multi-line comments using `/*` to begin and `*/` to end.

Also note that the line we execute ends with a semicolon (`;`). Although semicolons are _technically_ optional due to automatic semicolon insertion, **it is considered best practice to always use semicolons at the end of statements**.

We also use `console.log` to print out data from our program to the console. `console` is a globally available object exposed by Node.js (and is provided in browsers as well) that allows developers to send text to the standard output and standard error channels. The `log` function of the console object will send data to `process.stdout`, which will display on your terminal.

In this example, we simply tell the console to log the string `'Hello World'`, which we then should see in the terminal to the right of our editor.

To run your program, simply press **run** at the top of the page, and observe the output to the right. You should see `Hello World`, and with that, you've written your first JavaScript program!

**Note:** In JavaScript, you can declare text strings with either single or double quotes. Single quotes are more common, but it is more important to just pick a style and stick with it. For these examples, we will prefer single quotes.

---

### **2. Hello Variable**

In our first example, we simply printed out a string that we provided directly to `console.log`. But what if we wanted to print out a variable? In this example, we will create a variable to store our string, and then pass that variable to `console.log`. In a new file, write the following code:


```javascript
const message = 'Hello Variable';
console.log(message);
```

Here, we store the string `'Hello Variable'` in the variable `message`. In JavaScript, we declare variables with the keywords `var`, `let`, or `const`. We will cover the different behaviors of these variable declarations in an upcoming example, but for now, just follow the following guidelines for use:

* `const`: Your default variable declaration. Variable cannot be reassigned once created.
* `let`: If you need to reassign a variable, use `let` instead of `const`.
* `var`: The old way of declaring variables. *Do not use `var`, unless you really know why you need to use it.*

When you run your file, you should see "Hello Variable" printed to the console. You've just created and used your first variable!

_Check out [this article](http://www.jstips.co/en/javascript/keyword-var-vs-let/) for more on the differences between `var` and `let`._

---

### **3. Reassigning Variables**

Let's see how we can reassign variables (and variable types) in JavaScript. In your editor, enter the following code:

```javascript
let val = 'One';
console.log(val);
val = 1
console.log(val);
```

Much like the previous example, we assign a string to a variable. This time, we use the `let` keyword instead of the `const` keyword, because we are going to reassign its value. We assign the string `'One'`, and then log it to the console.

Then, we reassign the value of our variable to `1`. Note that `1` is not a string, like the value the variable held before, but is instead a number. These are two distinct variable types in JavaScript. In many languages, you cannot reassign a variable to a value of another type, but JavaScript is loosely typed and so every variable can hold any type of value.

We then print our number to the console to see that the value was really changed.

---

### **4 If/Else and Control Flow**

In JavaScript, we often want to execute some code conditionally. We usually accomplish this with an `if` statement. This is similar to many modern languages, and allows us to test the truthfulness of some statement to conditionally control the flow of our program. 

`if` can be used by itself to do something if a condition is true:

```javascript
console.log('start');
if (true) {
  console.log('This will execute!');
}
console.log('end');
```

**Note:** the indentation of the code inside the `if` block is just aesthetic to increase readability. Unlike some languages, JavaScript is not whitespace-sensitive.

Note that we wrap the statement that we are going to execute conditionally in a block of `{ }`. This creates a code block, and everything inside will be executed if the condition is true. After the block is executed, the code will continue outside the block. In this case, our program should print:

```
start
This will execute!
end
```

`if` can also be used with `else` to branch between two flows depending on the condition of some statement.

```javascript
console.log('start');
if (true) {
  console.log('This will execute!');
} else {
  console.log('This will not execute!');
}
console.log('end');
```

With an `if/else` statement, the program executes either the `if` block if the condition returns `true`, or the `else` block if the `if` condition returns `false`. In this case, since the condition is simply the value `true`, the `if` block will always be run.

```
start
This will execute!
end
```

Finally, `if` statements can be extended to use `else if`, which will execute if a condition is `true` _and_ all above `if`s and `else if`s above it are `false`. In your editor, enter the following code:

```javascript
const number = 6;
if (number === 5) {
  console.log('The number is 5');
} else if (number === 6 ) {
  console.log('The number is 6');
} else if (number % 2 === 0) {
  console.log('The number is even');
} else {
  console.log('Catch all!');
}
```

The output of your program should be `The number is 6`. If we visually trace the flow of the program, we see that the `if` statement will return `false`, because `(number === 5)` will evaluate to `false`. Next, the program will get to the `else if (number === 6)`, which will evaluate to `true` and so `The number is 6` will be printed. Note that the next `else if` that checks `(number % 2 === 0)` (which is the way to check if a number is divisible by 2) will also evaluate to `true`! But because it is part of the same `if/else if/else` block, it will not be evaulated and `The number is even` will not be printed.

Controlling the flow of your program conditionally is an important part of understanding any programming language, so make sure that you understand how `if` statements work!

---

### **5. JavaScript Types**

You may come across developers who claim JavaScript has no types, **but this is not true**. In fact, there are 7 types in JavaScript:

6 Primitive Types:
* String: Represents textual data, assigned by wrapping text in single or double quotes.
* Number: Numerical data, which can be either integers (e.g. 1,-1, 9007199254740991) or floating point numbers (e.g. 0.1, -0.1, 4093.342).
* Boolean: Either `true` or `false`.
* Undefined: A variable that hasn't been assigned a value yet or the value returned from a function that doesn't specify a returned value will be `undefined`.
* Null: Can only be `null`. Not to be confused with `undefined`, `null` is often used to indicate a value has been set, but there is no value.

1 Composite Type:
* Object: A collection of properties, which are primitive values or other objects. In JavaScript, Functions are objects that can be called (which sounds a lot more confusing than it is). Objects are an important part of JavaScript, and we will cover them soon.

As we saw in the previous example, you cannot specify the type of a variable in JavaScript explicitly, and a variable's type can be reassigned at will. To see what the current type of a variable is, we can use the `typeof` operator, which returns a string representation of the type (e.g. 'string', 'number', 'undefined', etc.).

The next example demonstrates some of the weakly-typed gotchas that exist in JavaScript.

```javascript
let stringVar = '1';
let numVar = 1;

console.log(typeof stringVar); // should print 'string'
console.log(typeof numVar); // should print 'number'

// here's where things get fun...
if (stringVar == numVar) {
  console.log('Variables are equal.')
} else {
  console.log('Variables were not equal.');
}
```

What do you think the if/else block prints after we compare the string `'1'` to the number `1`? One might reasonably assume that the equality test doesn't pass, and `Variables were not equal` is printed to the console. However, you might be surprised to see that the code example prints out `Variables are equal.`. Why is this?

In JavaScript, the `==` operator will test for equality between two values, but if it can it will convert the values to the same type before the comparison is made. In our example, it will convert the values to be the same type, and _then_ compare them, at which point they are equal. This is one of the most common code bugs in JavaScript, and so it is important to keep in mind.

If instead you want to do strict comparison between two values, where no type conversion is done, then use `===`, the strict equality operator. In fact, `===` is most often what you mean when you do comparisons, and should be your comparison operator of choice _unless you have a really good reason to allow implicit type conversions_.

---

### **6. For and While Loops**

In addition to `if` statements, another important way of controlling flow is through loops. In JavaScript, `for` and `while` loops work like in many other languages.

A `for` loop has three parts, each separated by a semi-colon:
1. An _initializing expression_, where code is executed prior to the loop running the first time.
2. The _condition_, which is evaluated before every iteration of the loop to determine if the loop should break.
3. The _increment expression_, which is run after every iteration of the loop.

Perhaps the best way to appreciate how for loops work is to see them in action. In the following example, we print all of the numbers from 0 to 9.

```JavaScript
for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
```

In the above example, we create a for loop with the three parts:
1. We intialize the variable `i` and assign it the value 0
2. Our condition is that the loop runs until `i` is no longer less than 10
3. After each loop iteration, we incremenet `i` by 1.

If you copy the code into your editor and run in it, you should see that it prints out 0 through 9, each on their own line. Note that the program does not print the value 10, because the condition check fails when i === 10.

In addition to `for` loops, there are also `while` loops. While loops simply check a condition before each loop iteration, and then run their code block if that condition is `true`. We can recreate the functionality of the for loop run above:

```JavaScript
let i = 0;
while (i < 10) {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
}
```

In the while loop example, we initialize our variable `i` to be 0. Then, our loop runs as long as i is less than 10. Inside of our loop, we print out the current value of i, and then increment the value.

Be careful! You can easily create infinte loops if you aren't sure that your condition will eventually return `false`! For example, if we didn't increment i in our example, the function would just print `0` until you killed the program!

---

### **7. Creating a Function**

In software development it is usually advised to separate code into discrete chunks of code called functions that can be called by other parts of your program.

To declare a function, use the `function` keyword followed by the function name and a list of parameters, separated by a comma. Because JavaScript is weakly typed, you cannot specify the type of each parameter as you might do in Java or another typed language. To call a function, just use the function's name followed by parentheses with the parameters inside.

```JavaScript
function plusOne(value) {
  value++;
  return value;
}

let num = 0;
let value = plusOne(num);
console.log(value);

```

The above function should print the value `1`, as the function returns 1 more than the number passed in. Does that example seem too simple? Theres actually a lot of interesting things going on in the above example.

One thing to note is that we _could_ call the function _before we declare it_ in the same file, but it is considered bad practice. **Always declare before you use.**

If you were to print the value of `num` after the function runs, what would you expect it to be? You might say 1, but it is actually `0`. When we pass a primitive value (strings, numbers, etc) into a function, we pass it _by value_ (with a few exceptions). That is, the function actually receives an equivalent copy of `num` so the value of `num` cannot be changed from inside the function. Instead, the parameter acts as a new variable inside of the function.

Also remember, there is no type-checking in JavaScript functions. If a string had been sent to the function, the program would have run just fine until it tried to execute the line `value++`, at which case the value of the variable value is converted to a Number (because thats what the `++` operator expects) and becomes `NaN`, meaning Not-A-Number. If type-checking is important for your programs (and it probably should be), you would either have to explicity check parameter types inside the function, or use something like [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/), which we will cover later in the lab.

You can also declare functions using the shorthand 'arrow-syntax' like so:

```javascript
let plusOne = (value) => {
  value++;
  return value;
}
```

**Note:** there are several complex differences between functions defined with the normal syntax `function plusOne(value) {}` and the arrow syntax `(value) => {}`. We will not cover them in this lab, but you can [learn more here](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/when-and-why-you-should-use-es6-arrow-functions-and-when-you-shouldnt-3d851d7f0b26).

We could easily hold an entire lab on JavaScript functions, but for now it is important to know that you can create and call JavaScript functions in either of the ways used above.

---

### **8. Creating an Object**

Objects in JavaScript are just collections of key-value pairs. Since JavaScript does not enforce a strict class hierarchy system, objects can be created and modified at will. Let's create a basic, empty object:

```javascript
const obj = {};
```

Pretty easy. Let's add some properties to it. Remember, objects are just sets of comma-separated key-value pairs.

```javascript
const obj = {
  hi: 'hello',
  anotherProperty: 5
};
```

Properties on objects can be accessed with the `.` operator, or by their name surrounded in square brackets `[]`. Once accessed, they can be treated just like normal variables - they can be reassigned with the `=` operator, and default to `undefined` if they do not exist on the object:

```javascript
const obj = {
  hi: 'hello',
  anotherProperty: 5
};

console.log(obj.hi); // 'hello'
console.log(obj['anotherProperty']); // 5
console.log(obj.propertyThatIsntDefined); // undefined

obj.propertyThatIsntDefined = 35;

console.log(obj.propertyThatIsntDefined); // 35
```

Object properties can hold just about anything. We can even store functions or other objects in there:

```javascript
const obj = {
  hi: 'hello',
  anotherProperty: 5,
  aFunctionProperty: function() {
    console.log('I was called!');
  },
  aboutMe: {
    greeting: 'hey'
  }
};

obj.aFunctionProperty(); // prints 'I was called!'
console.log(obj.aboutMe.greeting); // prints 'hey'
```

Let's take a closer look at the function stored in the object now. As in many other languages, when a function is part of an object, it can access its containing object using the keyword `this`. All of the containing object's properties are accessible through `this`:

```javascript
const obj = {
  hi: 'hello',
  anotherProperty: 5,
  aFunctionProperty: function() {
    console.log(this.aboutMe.greeting); // prints 'hey'
  },
  aboutMe: {
    greeting: 'hey'
  }
};

obj.aFunctionProperty(); // prints 'hey'
```

**Note:** `this` is the source of much confusion in JavaScript. We won't get too deep into the complexities of `this` during this lab, but one important issue to know about is that `this` is assigned differently depending on whether you defined your function with the normal syntax `function() {}` or the arrow syntax `() => {}`! You can learn more about the `this` keyword [here](https://medium.com/quick-code/understanding-the-this-keyword-in-javascript-cb76d4c7c5e8).

---

### **9. Arrays**

In our final tutorial, we are going to cover Arrays. In JavaScript, Arrays are not their own primitive type, but are Objects that you can iterate over (and they can even hold properties just like Objects do).

---

## **Conclusion**

Through the examples above, we have walked through the basics of programming with JavaScript. While there are many more keywords to learn, built-in functions for manipulating data, and plenty more gotchas, you have learned enough to develop interesting programs in Node.js! The best way to learn the rest of JavaScript is simply to start programming, and as you encounter issues or desire certain functionality (splitting strings, concatenating arrays, etc.), just look it up! You will quickly become familiar with what is available and become comfortable with JavaScript syntax, making you formidable Node.js developer.

In the next section, we will look at how you can use your JavaScript new skills to develop applications with Node.js, starting with what exactly Node.js is.

### [Next: Node.js](./4.nodejs.md)