# **Node.js Workshop**

### [Previous: Express.js](./5.express.js.md)

## Eradani Connect Framework

### **Table of Contents**

* [Introduction: Eradani Connect Framework](#introduction-eradani-connect-framework)
* [Moving Our Server Over to the i](#moving-our-server-over-to-the-i)
* [Calling an RPG Program](#calling-an-rpg-program)
* [Connecting to Db2](#connecting-to-db2)
* [Conclusion](#conclusion)

---

### **Introduction: Eradani Connect Framework**

Congratulations on getting this far! With all of the material you've covered, you're now ready to hit the real purpose of this lab: getting the latest, cutting-edge, open-source technologies to interact with existing IBM i applications. In this section, we will move our Express server over to our IBM i LPARs and set the servers up to **interact directly with Db2 and RPG on the i!** This process will effectively generalize to any other commands, programs, or data available on your IBM i, meaning that once this section is complete, you will have all of the tools required for your IBM i applications to tap into the world open-source web technology!

We will achieve this using the Eradani Connect Framework. **This framework is provided for this workshop, and will have a freely accessible development version on NPM soon.** 

The first step is to get set up on the LPARs, which we will take 15 minutes now to set up. During this point in the workshop, we will be distributing all of the necessary information for connecting to your LPAR's PASE environment and starting up Node there for development. **We will move on to the next section once this process is complete, so please enjoy your coffee break. We'll return in 15 minutes for the rest of the workshop.**

[To the top](#nodejs-workshop)

---

### **Moving Our Server Over to the i**

Your workshop LPARs come pre-packaged with IBM's Open Source tools enabled and SSH configured. Now that we have Node up and running, we are going to use these tools to move our Express applications from the previous section of the workshop to the i. We need two files for this: a `package.json` file and the main `app.js` file, both of which are provided below. In your PASE environment SSH session, you will need to create these two files and copy/paste their respective code into them.

You can create the files with the following two commands:

```bash
touch package.json
touch app.js
```

Then, you can manually retype the contents of each file or copy/paste them. If you decide to copy/paste them, copy the contents for the `package.json` file now (available below), then open up the `package.json` file in a text editor with the following command:

```bash
nano package.json
```

Once you have pasted or retyped the contents of the file, press `Ctrl+O` and then `Enter` to save the file, then `Ctrl+X` to exit the editor. Now repeat for the `app.js` file.

**In the app.js file, don't forget to set the port number for your application!** In the final line of app.js, you will see `server.listen('<REPLACE THIS STRING WITH YOUR PORT NUMBER>');`. You have been provided with a port number - please replace the entire text string with that number (including the quotes). For example, if your port number is `2019`, then the line should be: `server.listen(2019);`.

`package.json`
```json
{
  "name": "workshop",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "app.js",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.16.4",
    "request": "^2.88.0",
    "request-promise": "^4.2.4",
    "eradani-connect-node": "github:eradani-inc/eradani-connect-node"
  },
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

`app.js`
```javascript
const http = require('http');
const express = require('express');

const requestPromise = require('request-promise');

const app = express();

app.get('/', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello Internet!');
});

app.get('/hello', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello, ' + request.query.name);
});

app.get('/data', function (request, response) {
    requestPromise('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1')
        .then(result => {
            console.log(result);
            response.end(result);
        })
        .catch(error => {
            console.log(error);
            response.status(500).end(error);
        });
})

const server = http.createServer(app);

const PORT = '<REPLACE THIS STRING WITH YOUR PORT NUMBER>';
server.listen(PORT);
console.log(`Server is now listening on port: ${PORT}`);
```

Once you have copied the two files, you will need to install the NPM dependencies with the following command:

```bash
npm install
```

**This command may take a bit to run.**

Once it completes, run your Node application with `node app.js`.

You should then be able to navigate to the URL of the LPAR, followed by your port number in your browser to see "Hello Internet!". The URL will follow this format: `http://<LPAR_IP_ADDRESS>:<PORT>/`. For example, if the LPAR address was `www.yourlpar.com` and the port was `2019`, the full URL would be `http://www.yourlpar.com:2019/`.

If you see "Hello Internet!" in your browser, congratulations! You now have a Node application running on the IBM i! In the next section, we will add a '/linux-calc' route which will run an RPG program on our LPAR and return its results.

[To the top](#nodejs-workshop)

---

### **Calling an RPG Program**

Your workshop LPAR already has a simple RPG program compiled on it, accessible at `WORKSHOP/LINUX_CALC`. For reference, the source code for this RPG program is included below.

```js
H*                                                                 
H***************************************************************   
H**   LINUX_CALC                                               *   
H***************************************************************   
H*                                                                 
C     *ENTRY        PLIST                                          
C                   PARM                    ibmicores        15 0  
C                   PARM                    linuxservers     16 0  
C     IBMICORES     MULT      20            LINUXSERVERS           
C                   seton                                        LR
```

This is a very simple RPG program, but the concepts introduced in this section will generalize to any program on your system. What this program will do is take the value of its first parameter, `ibmicores`, multiply it by 20, and store the result in its second parameter, `linuxservers`. Our goal in this section is to create a uniform interface to this RPG program so that it can be freely used in our Open Source applications.

There are two steps to our process:

1. Tell the Eradani Connect Framework where this program is located and basic information about its parameters
2. Create an API route in our Node.js application which accesses this program.

In order for the Eradani Connect Framework to generate an API for our RPG program, we need to specify basic information about the program. This is done through a _Program Model Definition_. A _Program Model Definition_ is a set of JSON data which lists at minimum the name of the program object, the library where it can be found, and a list of its available parameters. Create a new file in your editor, and name it `pgm-model.js`. 

Let's start by importing the Eradani Connect Framework module for this file. That module will contain all of the tools we need to call the RPG program:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');
```

Once we have imported the Eradani Connect Framework module, we create a new instance of an Eradani Connect PGM interface with two arguments to begin with: the program name, and then an empty JSON object for the program's options, which we will fill in next.

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

new eradaniConnect.run.Pgm('LINUX_CALC', {});
```

Now, the options object (second argument) will contain the rest of the information required to call this RPG program. Naturally, the next most important piece of information to call this program is the library name, which we specify with the `lib` property of the options object:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

new eradaniConnect.run.Pgm('LINUX_CALC', {
    lib: 'WORKSHOP'
});
```

Simple! Finally, we need to tell the Eradani Connect Framework what parameters this RPG program accepts so that the Framework can generate a uniform interface to the RPG program. This is the most complex part of any Open Source-IBM i connection because the way Open Source software communicates is fundamentally different from the way traditional IBM i software communicates. It's as if the two systems speak entirely different languages. The Eradani Connect Framework can speak both languages, so once we describe the RPG program's parameters to the Framework, it will be able to translate freely between the RPG and JavaScript parts of our application.

Looking back at the RPG program source code, we can see that there are two parameters which are both Packed Decimals:

```js
C                   PARM                    ibmicores        15 0  
C                   PARM                    linuxservers     16 0  
```

The first parameter has a length of 15, and the second parameter has a length of 16. To describe a parameter to the Eradani Connect Framework, we need at least two pieces of data in JSON format: a name for the parameter, and the data type for the parameter.

For the first parameter, that definition would look like this:

```javascript
{
    name: 'IBMICORES',
    type: new eradaniConnect.dataTypes.PackedDecimal(15, 0)
}
```

Parameter information in a Program Model file should be in a JSON array under the key `params`. So, after defining our parameters, our Program Model file will look like this:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

new eradaniConnect.run.Pgm('LINUX_CALC', {
    lib: 'WORKSHOP',
    params: [{
        name: 'IBMICORES',
        type: new eradaniConnect.dataTypes.PackedDecimal(15, 0)
    }, {
        name: 'LINUXSERVERS',
        type: new eradaniConnect.dataTypes.PackedDecimal(16, 0),
        defaultValue: 0
    }]
});
```

**NOTE:** When calling a program, the names you give the parameters are for your use only. Parameters will be supplied to the RPG program in the order you specify, not by name, so the order is important!

You may notice that we added an optional attribute to the second parameter. There are a host of optional attributes for Program Model specifications to make life easier for you, the most popular of which is the `defaultValue` attribute. If this attribute is specified, the Eradani Connect Framework will automatically use this default value for its parameter _if the program is called without a value for that parameter_. Effectively, adding a `defaultValue` attribute to a parameter makes that parameter optional. If you attempt to call an RPG program through the Eradani Connect Framework while missing a required parameter (one which does not have a `defaultValue`), the Framework will reject your program call with an Error.

We have one final step to complete this Program Model file. Though we have created an interface to our RPG program, we have not stored that interface anywhere, meaning it cannot be used yet. To fix this, we will _export_ our RPG program interface from this file, so that other JavaScript files in our application can access it. We do this by assigning the RPG program interface to the global `module.exports` object. This is a globally-available object which is built-in to Node.js and is used for exporting variables to other modules in your program.

Our completed Program Model file should look like this:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Pgm('LINUX_CALC', {
    lib: 'WORKSHOP',
    params: [{
        name: 'IBMICORES',
        type: new eradaniConnect.dataTypes.PackedDecimal(15, 0)
    }, {
        name: 'LINUXSERVERS',
        type: new eradaniConnect.dataTypes.PackedDecimal(16, 0),
        defaultValue: 0
    }]
});
```

From this point on, we can officially call our RPG program from anywhere in our JavaScript application. Let's try it out by creating a REST API for the program.

**Switch back to your main `app.js` file**

Since we are now exporting the RPG program interface from the Program Model file, let's start by importing that interface into our `app.js` file, along with the Eradani Connect Framework module, and adding some configuration for connecting to the LPAR. Add these lines of code near the top of your `app.js` file, and be sure to fill in the required values from your lab information:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');
const linuxCalc = require('./pgm-model');

const config = {
    "connectionPath": {
        "host": "<Your LPAR URL>",
        "port": 47700
    },
    "username": "<Your LPAR Username>",
    "password": "<Your LPAR Password>"
}
```

**NOTE:** In a production application you would **never** store credentials in plain source code. In reality, you would supply them to the application on startup, either via console prompt or encrypted communication with an external authorization server. That being said, to keep this workshop simple we are storing credentials at the top of our file.

Remember how we said way back that there are different ways to import modules? Specifying a module with a file path like `./pgm-model` tells Node that it should look for the module in a file in the same directory as our current file, rather than looking directly in the `node_modules` folder for a module installed from NPM. You may notice that we don't have to add the `.js` to the file name. Node automatically checks for several different file extensions, including `.js`.

Next, let's create a standard Express route definition for the route `/linux-calc`. Your `app.js` file should now look like this:

```javascript
const http = require('http');
const express = require('express');

const requestPromise = require('request-promise');

const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');
const linuxCalc = require('./pgm-model');

const config = {
    "connectionPath": {
        "host": "<Your LPAR URL>",
        "port": 47700
    },
    "username": "<Your LPAR Username>",
    "password": "<Your LPAR Password>"
}

const app = express();

app.get('/', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello Internet!');
});

app.get('/hello', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello, ' + request.query.name);
});

app.get('/data', function (request, response) {
    requestPromise('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1')
        .then(result => {
            console.log(result);
            response.end(result);
        })
        .catch(error => {
            console.log(error);
            response.status(500).end(error);
        });
});

app.get('/linux-calc', function(request, response) {
    // Call our RPG program!
});

const server = http.createServer(app);

const PORT = '<REPLACE THIS STRING WITH YOUR PORT NUMBER>';
server.listen(PORT);
console.log(`Server is now listening on port: ${PORT}`);
```

Now we just need to call the RPG program in our API route and return the result to our clients. Inside the new `/linux-calc` API route, we need to open a connection to our LPAR and tell the Framework to run our program.

Let's zoom in on the new route definition:

```javascript
app.get('/linux-calc', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);
    // Call our RPG program!   
    linuxCalc.run(connection, {
        IBMICORES: request.query.num
    });
});
```

In this case, we are using the XML transport for our program call, which will generate a call to the XMLService web service on your LPAR. Then, we just need to take the program interface we imported from `pgm-model.js` and run the program, passing in the url query parameter `num` for the `IBMICORES` parameter. This means that our API can be called by sending an HTTP GET request to `http://<Your Server URL>/linux-calc?num=5`.

**There is just one last step, and then we'll be done.** You may have noticed that our API route doesn't return any data, so when you call this API, the RPG program will run but its result will not be returned to you. Let's fix that.

When executing a program, the Eradani Connect Framework returns a `Promise` which will contain the output of the program. If you need a refresher on Promises, check the [Node.js section of this workshop](./4.nodejs.md#promises).

So, we need to use the `.then` handler of the Promise returned by the Framework to send data back to our clients. Add a `.then` handler to the program call which sets the response status code to `200` (OK) and sends the value of the program Promise to `response.json()`:

```javascript
app.get('/linux-calc', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);
    // Call our RPG program!   
    linuxCalc.run(connection, {
        IBMICORES: request.query.num
    }).then(function(result) {
        response.status(200).json(result);
    });
});
```

Congratulations! You should now have a working API around this RPG program. Test it out by running your application, and then visiting your new route in a new tab of your browser. The URL should be something like: `http://<Your Server URL>/linux-calc?num=5`.

Your should see JSON output that looks something like `[{"IBMICORES":"5","LINUXSERVERS":"100"}]`. You can see here that the `IBMICORES` parameter is still `5`, and the `LINUXSERVERS` parameter is 5 x 20 (`100`).

For reference, your completed source code should look like this:

```javascript
const http = require('http');
const express = require('express');

const requestPromise = require('request-promise');

const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');
const linuxCalc = require('./pgm-model');

const config = {
    "connectionPath": {
        "host": "<Your LPAR URL>",
        "port": 47700
    },
    "username": "<Your LPAR Username>",
    "password": "<Your LPAR Password>"
}

const app = express();

app.get('/', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello Internet!');
});

app.get('/hello', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello, ' + request.query.name);
});

app.get('/data', function (request, response) {
    requestPromise('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1')
        .then(result => {
            console.log(result);
            response.end(result);
        })
        .catch(error => {
            console.log(error);
            response.status(500).end(error);
        });
});

app.get('/linux-calc', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);
    // Call our RPG program!   
    linuxCalc.run(connection, {
        IBMICORES: request.query.num
    }).then(function(result) {
        response.status(200).json(result);
    });
});

const server = http.createServer(app);

const PORT = '<REPLACE THIS STRING WITH YOUR PORT NUMBER>';
server.listen(PORT);
console.log(`Server is now listening on port: ${PORT}`);
```

**Quick Recap**: This was a heavy section, so don't worry if some of it seemed complex. Essentially what we did was:
1. Describe our RPG program to the Eradani Connect Framework
2. Let the Eradani Connect Framework generate a reusable JavaScript interface to our RPG program
3. Open a connection to our LPAR so that we can call the program
4. Create an API route in our application which calls our RPG program and returns the result

The core of the Eradani Connect Framework is Program Model Files. These files allow the Framework to generate reusable, universal interfaces to _absolutely any IBM i resource_ which you can then use throughout your program. 

In the next section, we will use a similar Program Model File to describe a Db2 SQL query.

[To the top](#nodejs-workshop)

---

### **Connecting to Db2**

One of the primary goals of the Eradani Connect Framework is to create a consistent, universal interface to IBM i resources. In accordance with that goal, the process for creating an interface to a Db2 SQL query is nearly identical to that of calling an RPG program.

Just like for our RPG program, the first step (and just about only) step is to create a model file for our SQL query. Create a new file called `sql-model.js`. While the name does not have any inherent meaning, it is typically good practice to keep your model files separate from the functions that use them.

Start out your `sql-model.js` file by **importing** the Eradani Connect Framework and **exporting** a new Eradani Connect SQL model:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Sql()
```

For this SQL query, we will be querying the `QIWS.QCUSTCDT` file since this sample file is present by default on every IBM i. This file contains some sample customer data, where each customer has an associated _balance due_, along with other basic customer information.

Let's start with the most simple query: retrieving all members of the `QIWS.QCUSTCDT` file. For those of you who are new to SQL, SQL is the **S**tructured **Q**uery **L**anguage, and is the standard across the open source world for accessing relational databases. Db2 supports SQL. You can learn more about SQL [here](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/).

To _select_ all of the members from the `QIWS.QCUSTCDT` file along with all of their associated fields, our SQL query will look like this: `SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT`. Let's add that to our SQL Model file:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Sql('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT');
```

Congratulations! You can now run this SQL query against Db2 from anywhere in your Node.js application. Pretty simple, huh?

**NOTE:** We define our SQL query in a separate file from the rest of our application logic to keep our code clean. However, you can also create these Program Model and SQL Model specifications on-the-fly inside your application logic if you really need to. Just move your model definition into your API route handler function, and the model will be generated each time a request comes in for the data, rather than just once on program start-up. While defining a model inside an API route is typically less efficient and tougher to maintain, there are some cases where you will need that flexibility, so we do our best to support those needs.

Let's create an API route for this SQL query, shall we?

Switch back to your `app.js` file and import your SQL Model file by adding this line near the top of the file:

```javascript
const getCustomers = require('./sql-model');
```

Now that we have access to the SQL query in this file, let's create an API route which runs the SQL query and returns its result. Create a GET route at `/customers` like so:

```javascript
app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Run the SQL Query and return the result!
});
```

Now, inside the route handler function, open a connection to your LPAR (or use a persistent connection by creating the connection outside of your route handler function) and use it to run the SQL query. We will use the XML transport again to keep things simple, but you are also welcome to take a stab at using the iDb or ODBC transport if you'd like.

```javascript
app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);

    getCustomers.run(connection);
});
```

Finally, attach a `.then` handler to the SQL query interface and return the result of the query to your client with a `200` (OK) status code! **The framework will automatically convert the Db2 SQL output into JSON for you**.

```javascript
app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);

    // Run the SQL Query and return the result!
    getCustomers.run(connection).then(function(customers) {
        response.status(200).json(customers);
    });
});
```

And with that, you now have an API to a specific query in Db2! This API will be open to the entire internet, but don't worry - because the connection is managed directly by Eradani Connect, _only the specific SQL query we created_ can be run by this API, so there is no danger of hackers attempting to inject malicious SQL into your database. We could also add OAuth2.0 authentication and authorization to this API, but that is outside of the scope of this lab.

**This is all fine if we want to have a single, static SQL query that we run over and over again, but what if we need to parametrize the SQL query?** No problem! If you visit your brand new SQL API in your browser, you may notice that buried in the JSON data, each Customer entry has a _balance due_. Let's change our API so that we can retrieve only those customers with a `BALDUE` greater than some parameter to the API.

The first step is to parametrize our SQL Model, to tell the Eradani Connect Framework that this query uses parameters. To do that, we need to update our SQL query to use standard SQL parameter markers and add a parameter listing to the SQL Model file.

Switch over to your `sql-model.js` file. It should look like this:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Sql('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT');
```

In SQL we mark parameters with a `?`. We are going to add a `WHERE` clause to our SQL query to select only those customers with `BALDUE >= ?`. The `?` tells Db2 where to insert our parameter. Change your `sql-model.js` file so it looks like this:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Sql('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT WHERE BALDUE >= ?');
```

Now, in order to call this SQL query with parameters, we need to tell Eradani Connect about the parameters and give them names so they can be referenced in input and output. We're going to add an options object to our SQL model with a `params` JSON array. Change your `sql-model.js` file so it looks like this:

```javascript
const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');

module.exports = new eradaniConnect.run.Sql('SELECT * FROM QIWS.QCUSTCDT WHERE BALDUE >= ?', {
    params: [{
        name: 'minBalDue'
    }]
});
```

You may notice that the parameter specification looks familiar from the RPG section of this workshop. We do everything in our power to keep interfaces in the Eradani Connect Framework consistent and simple. That way, you can focus on building new features and let us handle the tricky and tedious work of translating between technologies.

Now your SQL model will accept a parameter named `minBalDue`. In this case, we just specified a name for the parameter, but the Eradani Connect Framework allows you to specify many other attributes on a parameter. For example, we could specify a data type for the parameter and have the Framework automatically validate and sanitize inputs to the SQL query, or we could make the parameter optional and add default or conditional behavior.

Let's upgrade our API to accept a parameter and pass it to the SQL query.

Switch back to your `app.js` file and scroll down to your `/customers` API route. It should look like this:

```javascript
app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);

    // Run the SQL Query and return the result!
    getCustomers.run(connection).then(function(customers) {
        response.status(200).json(customers);
    });
});
```

We're going to set this API route up to accept a URL query parameter called `minBalDue` and pass it to the SQL query. Look at the `getCustomers.run(connection)` line. This function takes a second argument - a list of parameters for the query as JSON. Add this JSON object to the query call as a second argument after `connection`:

```javascript
{
    minBalDue: request.query.minBalDue
}
```

Your completed route definition should now look like this:

```javascript
app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);

    // Run the SQL Query and return the result!
    getCustomers.run(connection, {
        minBalDue: request.query.minBalDue
    }).then(function(customers) {
        response.status(200).json(customers);
    });
});
```

For reference, your whole `app.js` file should look like this:

```javascript
const http = require('http');
const express = require('express');

const requestPromise = require('request-promise');

const eradaniConnect = require('eradani-connect-node');
const linuxCalc = require('./pgm-model');
const getCustomers = require('./sql-model');

const config = {
    "connectionPath": {
        "host": "<Your LPAR URL>",
        "port": 47700
    },
    "username": "<Your LPAR Username>",
    "password": "<Your LPAR Password>"
}

const app = express();

app.get('/', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello Internet!');
});

app.get('/hello', function(request, response) {
    response.end('Hello, ' + request.query.name);
});

app.get('/data', function (request, response) {
    requestPromise('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1')
        .then(result => {
            console.log(result);
            response.end(result);
        })
        .catch(error => {
            console.log(error);
            response.status(500).end(error);
        });
});

app.get('/linux-calc', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);
    // Call our RPG program!   
    linuxCalc.run(connection, {
        IBMICORES: request.query.num
    }).then(function(result) {
        response.status(200).json(result);
    });
});

app.get('/customers', function(request, response) {
    // Open a connection to our LPAR
    const connection = new eradaniConnect.transports.Xml("*LOCAL", config.username, config.password, config.connectionPath);

    // Run the SQL Query and return the result!
    getCustomers.run(connection, {
        minBalDue: request.query.minBalDue
    }).then(function(customers) {
        response.status(200).json(customers);
    });
});

const server = http.createServer(app);

const PORT = '<REPLACE THIS STRING WITH YOUR PORT NUMBER>';
server.listen(PORT);
console.log(`Server is now listening on port: ${PORT}`);
```

And now, for the moment of truth. Once your have made sure your server is up-to-date, run the server with the command:

```bash
node app.js
```

Wait a few seconds for the application to start up, then navigate to the URL of your application in your browser. Remember, the format for the URL is `http://<LPAR_ADDRESS>:<PORT>/`. If you see 'Hello Internet!' in your browser, then your server is running, and it is time to check if our Db2 operation works.

Navigate to the `/customers` route in your browser and give it a URL parameter of `minBalDue=500`. The URL format in this case would be `http://<LPAR_ADDRESS>:<PORT>/customers?minBalDue=500`. Our workshop LPARs are small, so it may take a few seconds for this operation to complete. But once it does, you should see some JSON customer data on the page! Try changing the value of the `minBalDue` parameter in your URL - the customers returned should change with it.

**Congratulations! You now have a fully functional JavaScript application which leverages RPG and Db2 on your IBM i!**

[To the top](#nodejs-workshop)

---

### **Conclusion**

Now that we have built a basic Express server that runs commands on the IBM i, it is theoretically possible for us to build any open-source web application which communicates with any other IBM i application using the tools we have discussed here! These past few sections have packed a lot of content, but they will give you the basics of what you need to get started building modern REST interfaces for your IBM i applications. **And don't worry about keeping this all in your head - you will have full access to all of the workshop materials _and your LPARs_ for a month after our workshop.**

The next sections will cover best practices for building production-worthy applications for the i. Good luck!

[To the top](#nodejs-workshop)

### [Next: TypeScript](./7.typescript.md)