# POWERUp2019 Node.js Workshop

### [Previous: TypeScript](./6.typescript.md)

## **LoopBack**

### **Table of Contents**

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Setting up ODBC on your Development Machine](#setting-up-odbc-on-your-development-machine)
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
* [IBM i Connector](#ibm-i-connector)
* [Creating Models](#creating-models)
* [Using Models in APIs and JavaScript](#using-models-in-apis-and-javascript)
* [Migration and Discovery](#migration-and-discovery)
* [Conclusion](#conclusion)

---

### **Introduction**

LoopBack is a Node.js framework that allows you to quickly create REST API endpoints that can turn your IBM i (or any system) into a data server. It also serves as an ORM system in your JavaScript code, converting your  Through an easy to use CLI, you can create models, define data sources (such as Db2 on your IBM i, or multiple IBM is), and generate secure endpoints that other data services can connect to in order to create, read, update, and delete select records from your system.

LoopBack is officially supported by IBM, and the connector for Db2 on IBM i, like many other IBM i Node.js packages, is maintained by the IBM i open-source software team. Furthermore, there are support options available through IBM that allow you to get the help you need when you have issues using Loopback.

Because not all features appear to be supported in Loopback 4 at the time of writing this workshop, the tutorials below will be written using LoopBack 3. As soon as LoopBack 4 has the functionality of the earlier version, the IBM i open-source software team will create additional LoopBack examples for version 4 and host them on our [GitHub IBM i Open-Source Software Examples repository](https://github.com/ibm/ibmi-oss-examples). The IBM i connector for LoopBack will be tested to ensure compatability with both versions.

And with that, let's get started developing REST APIs with LoopBack! If you aren't sure was a REST API is, or why you would want to create one, feel free to [do a little reading](https://restfulapi.net/). These lab instructions aren't going anywhere!

---

### **Setting up ODBC on your Development Machine**

`loopback-connector-ibmi` connects to your IBM i through the ODBC driver, so that will have to be installed before you can use Loopback on your IBM i.

The great side benefit is that once you set up ODBC to connect to your IBM i, you can use the `odbc` package outside of loopback. The Node.js `odbc` package is maintained by the IBM i Open-Source Software Team, and is the preferred method of connecting to Db2 both from your development machines and from on your IBM i itself.

To complete this step, we have wrtitten [a guide on the IBM i OSS Examples repo page on GitHub](https://github.com/ibm/ibmi-oss-examples).

---

### **Getting Started**

First things first, we are going to use npm to globally install the LoopBack CLI. Although its usually not a good idea to globally install packages from npm (as most are scoped only to a single application), tools like languages and CLIs are the exception. To install the CLI globally, enter:

```
$ npm install -g loopback-cli
```

This will allow us to use the CLI (command line interface) from anywhere on the system to generate a LoopBack application. Lets use it now to initialize our application. After you type `lb` in the terminal, you will be prompted for information. Below are some values that you can use when prompted:

```
$ lb
? What's the name of your application? loopback-app
? Enter name of the directory to contain the project: loopback-app
   create loopback-app/
     info change the working directory to loopback-app

? Which version of LoopBack would you like to use? 3.x (Active Long Term Support)
? What kind of application do you have in mind? api-server (A LoopBack API server with local User auth)
```

You should now have a directoy called loopback-app that is pre-built for you. Navigate to that directory, and then run:

```
node .
```

This will run the default script for the Node.js application in that directory, in this case our LoopBack application. You should see information printed on your screen similar to:

```
Web server listening at: http://localhost:3000
Browse your REST API at http://localhost:3000/explorer
```

If you navigate to the REST API URL, you will get an API explorer. There is one model created by default for you (`User`), which you can click and then interact with. In this case, the User is backed by a flat file as its datasource, instead of a database. You can play around with testing the API endpoints by clicking on the different HTTP methods and API formats, then clicking the 'Example Value' on the right hand side to prepopulate the data you send. When you have valid JSON to send, click 'Try it out!' and see the response!

You now have your first LoopBack application running a local API that interacts with a datasource (even if its not a database). After you define your models, you can also call these endpoints with built in functions like 'create' and 'update' that will also interact with the data in your datasource. This will make more sense below when we create a simple program with a connector to your IBM i.

---

### **IBM i Connector**


So we have created a LoopBack application, but right now it has no models that we might use in our application. Even worse, it can't connect to a datasource other than a file! Lets remedy the second issue first.

If using LoopBack with the IBM i, either accessing the system remotely or from a Node.js processing running directly on the IBM i, you are going to need to a connector that knows how to talk to Db2 as implemented on the IBM i. There are a number of connectors out there that can accomplish this, but the one preferred by the IBM i OSS Team is `loopback-connector-ibmi`. This is because it uses the ODBC connector for ease of remote AND local development, its completely free with no license required to run it, and most of all because we wrote it!

To install this connector, go to the directory where your LoopBack application is and download it from npm:

```
$ npm install loopback-connector-ibmi@beta
```

If you get errors when installing dealing with the installing of `odbc`, let us know. Its possible you didn't set the ODBC driver manager correctly on your system, or there may be compilation settings that need to be tweaked. Also, notice that you are installing the beta version of the connector. LoopBack support is very new, so test it out and feel free to post plenty of feedback and let us know of any issues you run into!

With the connector installed, you can now define a datasource for LoopBack that will connect to Db2 on IBM i. To do this, we are again going to use the LoopBack CLI, which will ask you a number of questions to walk through the setup process. Below is what the values entered might look like:

```
$ lb datasource
? Enter the datasource name: my-ibmi-machine
? Select the connector for my-ibmi-machine: other
? Enter the connector's module name loopback-connector-ibmi
? Install loopback-connector-ibmi No
Please manually add config for your custom connector loopback-connector-ibmi in server/datasources.json
```

When we enter the command `lb datasource`, we are asked to name our datasource. You can name the datasource anything you want, but I usually give it the machine name (or machine and schema name if only using one schema) of the IBM i system I am connecting to.

It will then ask you to select a connector. The new IBM i connector is not _yet_ officially supported by StrongLoop, so we need to select `other` (just press up once to get to the correct option).

We then enter the module name that we want, in this case `loopback-connector-ibmi`. Because we already installed it (in order to get the correct 1.0.0-beta version), we say that we do not want to install it. If we were to use the CLI to install it, the LoopBack CLI would download the version from NPM with the tag `latest`, which is not the beta version with more functionality.

As the CLI notes, we now have to manually configure our datasource in `server/datasources.json`. If we open that file, we should see the following:

`datasources.json`
```json
{
  "db": {
    "name": "db",
    "connector": "memory"
  },
  "my-ibmi-machine": {
    "name": "my-ibmi-machine",
    "connector": "loopback-connector-ibmi"
  }
}
```

Don't worry about the `db` datasource, this is created by default by LoopBack to do in-memory storing of persisted data. We need to add a few fields to the `my-ibmi-machine` datasource. In order to connect to our database through the ODBC DSN we set up before, we will pass add a `connectionString` key. Furthermore, if we want to limit our datasource to one schema (in this case, lets do it), we are going to add a `schema` key. This will set whatever schema we pass as the default schema, so we don't have to specify it when we give our table names.

Modify your `datasources.json` to look something like the following, renaming the DSN to be the DSN you set up above, and the schema to be your username on the system:

`datasources.json`
```json
{
  "db": {
    "name": "db",
    "connector": "memory"
  },
  "my-ibmi-machine": {
    "name": "my-ibmi-machine",
    "connector": "loopback-connector-ibmi",
    "connectionString": "DSN=dsn_name",
    "schema": "schema_name"
  }
}
```

Now when we create models, we can tie them to our IBM i Db2 datasource. When we create new instances of a model, delete existing instances, or retrieve what models we have, all will be done from the data that exists in our Db2 tables! Lets create some models now.

### **Creating Models**

// TODO:


### **Using Models in APIs and JavaScript**

// TODO:


### **Migration and Discovery**

Two concepts that you should be familiar with are **migration** and **discovery**. Both of these deal with ensuring that your datasource (in this case Db2 on IBM i) and the structure of your models in LoopBack are synced with one another:

* **Migration**: If you have created a number of models in LoopBack either by hand or using the model generator (using `lb model`), and want to create tables that match the structure of those models, you can use migration. This will generate and execute `CREATE TABLE` queries with the proper fields, data types, and keys for your models and tie them all together. Discussing migration is outside the scope of this lesson, but more information can be found at:

  * https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb3/Creating-a-database-schema-from-models.html

* **Discovery**: Discovery is the opposite of migration: If you have tables on your IBM i and want to create LoopBack models from those tables, you can use discovery. You still must define which tables you want to turn into models, but once you do, LoopBack will run queries to describe those tables, the data from which is then used to define models. Again, discovery is outside the scope of this lesson, but more information can be found at:

  * https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb3/Discovering-models-from-relational-databases.html

### **Conclusion**

LoopBack is a powerful tool useful for both object-relational mapping (ORM), whereby you can use objects (like ) to represent records in your relational database (Db2)

// TODO:

[To the top](#powerup2019-nodejs-workshop)

### [Next: Conclusion](./8.conclusion.md)